Course Outline
This training is comprised of (5) modules. Each module contains written and video content for you to review. You are welcome to complete the modules at your own pace before the closing of the registration deadline.

Additionally, each module ends with a quiz and journal assignment. Quizzes 1-5 will not be graded but you must answer the quiz questions to receive credit for the course. 
Use Quizzes 1-4 as feedback on areas where you may need more review. The journals are optional assignments that provide opportunities for you to reflect on the modules' content and your role as a signatory.

You can find further instructions for each quiz in the subsequent modules. 
Below is an outline of the orientation's modules.
Module 1: LEAD Center and RSO Introduction
LEAD Center
RSO 101
RSO Benefits
Signatory 101
Module 1 Quiz
Module 1 Journal
Module 2: Administrative Responsibilities
CalLink
Policies Signatories Need to Know
Risk Management
Space Reservation
Funding Your Student Org
Module 2 Quiz
Module 2 Journal
Module 3: Ethical Responsibilities
Wellness
Inclusion
Environment
Ways to Take Action
Module 3 Quiz
Module 3 Journal
Module 4: Preventing and Responding to Sexual Violence and Sexual Harassment in Your RSO
Note: You must read the materials in this module in sequential order.
Module Goals
Your Role in the Organization
Prevention Strategies
Supporting Survivors
Resources
Module 4 Quiz
Module 4 Journal
Module 5: Course Completion
Note: You must pass Quiz 5 to successfully complete the Signatory training.
Making Your Signatory Status Official!
Bonus Resources
Stay Updated
Module 5 Quiz
Module 5 Journal

Module 1
Module 1
Welcome to the LEAD Center!
The LEAD (Leadership, Engagement, Advising, & Development) Center is UC Berkeley’s hub for student involvement, leadership development, and co-curricular advising. In this module, you will learn about the LEAD Center and how we can support you as a signatory.
LEAD Center
COVID-19 Information 
RSO 101
Signatory 101
Quiz
Journal
LEAD Center
Website: lead@berkeley.edu 
Email: lead@berkeley.edu
Phone: 510-642-5171
Hours: Monday-Friday from 9:00am-5:00pm
RSO Advising Hours: By appointment
Location: 432 Eshleman, 4th Floor 
Facebook: @LEADCenter
Links to an external site.

Instagram: @theleadcenter
Links to an external site.
Page Reference:
Mission & Values
What We Do
Get Wiser from an Advisor
Website Information


Define Your Story. Discover Yourself.
Mission & Values
The LEAD Center’s mission is to support student-centered learning and development by cultivating student leadership. We advise and engage individuals, student organizations, student government, and various campus communities to enhance the co-curricular experience at UC Berkeley.
Our values are centered on Inclusion, Equity, Sustainability, Excellence, Community, Growth, and Empowerment.
We believe leadership is the continuous process of building authentic relationships, collectively taking bold action, and practicing intentional reflection to create positive change. Our mission is to guide the learning journey of students as they explore leadership and social change in their communities. Our definition of leadership informs our leadership approach.
What We Do
The LEAD Center provides the following services:
#Calapalooza: UC Berkeley's twice-a-year student involvement fair. RSOs can recruit and share more information about their organization. 
Advising: The LEAD Center staff advises student leaders from a variety of topics such as registration, space reservations, campus funding, major event planning, conflict resolution, and university resources.
Leadership Development: We host trainings and programs that cultivate learning and growth on a variety of topics among the student leader community.
Campus Concierge: We serve as a liaison between students and other campus departments. For example, if your RSO needs to pay the ASUC Student Union for a space reservation, we at the LEAD Center can bridge that connection and solve the issue together. 
Student Employment: The LEAD Center hires a staff of Peer Leadership Consultants (PLCs) which is a diverse group of student leaders who provide assistance to all communities at the LEAD Center. Their purpose is to provide advising and administrative support to student leaders.
Get Wiser from an Advisor
UC Berkeley is successful because of students like you who build communities of interest and create outside-the-classroom experiences. Thank you for all that you do!
Website Information 
The LEAD center also advises Fraternities and Sororities, Student Government, Cal Debate, QARC, and bridges Recruitment & Retention Centers. You can find more information about all of our student communities on our website!
Find information on additional resources on our Forms, Documents, & Resources page such as:
Signatory Training bCourse
Forms & Documents 
Campus Links
Event Planning 
Risk Management 
Policies
Visit our FAQs page Manage Your Student Org in order to:
Register your organization
View the Funding Guide 
Plan events
Reserve space
Manage high-risk events
Transition your organizations
Coronavirus Information

Coronavirus Campus Updates
For the most current information about the university's response to the coronavirus, please refer to coronavirus.berkeley.edu.
Update as of Thursday, June 2, 2022 - 8:30 p.m.
Alameda County has issued a new public health order
Links to an external site.
 requiring that masks be worn in most indoor locations beginning Friday, June 3. Because the city of Berkeley has its own public health jurisdiction, this order does not apply to the city of Berkeley and the UC Berkeley campus. In accordance with CDC and city recommendations, UC Berkeley continues to strongly recommend that masks be worn indoors.
Events
The City of Berkeley Public Health Officer has issued an update to the order requiring proof of vaccination
Links to an external site.
 for patrons and employees of certain businesses.
As of March 11, 2022, City of Berkeley requirements as they pertained to restaurants, gyms and indoor events where food or drink is served, were removed from this Order. Indoor Mega Events, 1,000 attendees or more indoors, should defer to the State’s Mega Event guidance
Links to an external site.
.
The City order now only strongly recommends proof of vaccination verification. So, the UC Berkeley RMT has permited local units/departments that manage indoor spaces where this order applies to choose whether to continue requiring proof of vaccination or not. This permission is only given through May 31, 2022. (Please note: All CalDining facilities and the RSF will no longer require proof of vaccination.)
Local units/departments should assess whether vaccination checking helps or hinders their particular event attendees’ participation. If a manager of a space chooses to continue checking proof of vaccination, care should be taken with communicating with attendees if checking proof of vaccination since it seems that most camps and city locations will no longer be choosing to require proof.
If a manager of a space chooses to continue checking proof of vaccination, the proof of vaccine protocol remains in place and must be followed.
For more information, check out UC Berkeley's Coronavirus Events Page.
At this phase of the pandemic, when managing events, please take into consideration the following:
Each department/division is responsible for the adherence to all COVID-related requirements in effect when hosting a gathering.
Event hosts must keep fully up-to-date on evolving requirements. The key authorities during this pandemic are CA Dept of Public Health, the City of Berkeley Public Health, Cal/OSHA, the UC system, and campus.
Maintain strong communication with your guests.
Venue Managers and event holders must follow current campus policies regarding face-coverings and display signage about the rules. (Note that currently there are far fewer requirements than in the past, you may only have stricter requirements with permission from the RMT.)
Checking for proof of vaccination is only allowed in situations listed in the city’s public health order
Links to an external site.
 through May 31, 2022, without expressed permission from the RMT. A department does not have to check if it does not wish to (please see update above for more information).
When contracting with third parties, contracts should be reviewed and have appropriate cancelation language, in case public health or operational conditions degrade.
The Events and External Relations Committee continues to be a resource for those trying to plan events. If you have questions, please contact us at: activitiesrecovery@berkeley.edu.
 

Signatory 101 
This section covers all the important components of being a signatory. It is important that you understand the administrative and ethical responsibilities that you hold as a student leader. How you navigate your role as a signatory can impact your organization's members. 
What is a Signatory?
Signatories are leaders of your respective organization. We know you will transform our campus through your care, inspiration, dedication, mentorship, and innovation. Berkeley would not be what it is if it weren’t for student leaders like you. We thank you! 
Additionally, as a signatory for your organization, you become the University and LEAD Center authorized representatives of your organization. Signatories voluntarily assume responsibility for the activities and conduct of your organization.


Signatory Requirements 
All (4) signatories must complete this course to learn what it means to be a signatory.
You must list all orgs for which you intend to serve as a signatory in Module 5 of this course. 
All (4) signatories must accept the Signatory Terms & Conditions for each of their orgs in CalLink. 
You can have a maximum of (8) signatories but feel free to decide what is the right amount for your organization. 
Signatory status must be renewed every academic year. We clear all signatory statuses on June 30th.
***ASUC/GA have unique signatory requirements - your Student Government will provide additional information
 
Accepting Your Signatory Terms & Conditions in CalLink
Once you've completed this Signatory Training bCourse and listed all your orgs in Module 5, the Signatory position will be assigned to your organization's CalLink roster(s). Each signatory will need to accept the Terms & Conditions in CalLink which can be accessed via email from CalLink or through your CalLink memberships. We process signatories weekly so please be patient with the email inviting you to accept your Signatory Terms & Conditions
 
Signatory Expectations
Signatories play a crucial role in student communities. As a signatory, you are granted the privilege to reserve space on campus for meetings and events, allowed to apply for funding on behalf of your organization, and manage your organization's CalLink presence. Additionally, when you accept the Signatory Terms & Conditions, you are letting the university know that you've taken this training, understand the significance of serving as your group's authorized representative, and will take responsibility for the organization. The LEAD Center expects signatories to identify themselves as such to the members of their organizations and to share what they learned in this training in a timely manner, particularly the information on harm & violence prevention in student communities.
 
Signatories' Dual Roles
Signatories have (2) major areas of their role: administrative and ethical.
Administrative responsibilities are all the important logistical and financial components that keep your student organization active, thriving, and registered. We will cover that in Module 2.
Ethical responsibilities refers to the leadership styles and practices that create a safe and inclusive environment for your members. We will review more in Module 3.


Back to Module 1

Module 2
Module 2
Administrative Responsibilities
This module will cover all of a signatory's administrative responsibilities.
CalLink
Policies Signatories Need to Know
Risk Management
Space Reservation
Funding Your Student Org
Quiz
Journal
CalLink 
CalLink is UC Berkeley’s official database for Registered Student Organizations. Although you may use google drive, email, social media, or others apps to manage your organization, we encourage you to also use CalLink for the following reasons: 
Registration | The university recognition process for all student organizations is administered through CalLink. Your "active status" in CalLink gives your student org the rights and privileges associated with recognition.
Recruiting | All new students are directed to CalLink to find community in student organizations. Prospective members can browse by organization category to find groups to join.
Event Publicity | Post your RSO events and info sessions on the CalLink events page.
Manage Your Org | You can manage membership, communication, documents, elections, and finances via the CalLink tools.
Access Your Finances | Orgs with funding can use the CalLink finance tools to create and approve CalLink purchase requests. Your org must be ASUC sponsored and have agents to use this service. 
Official Communication | The LEAD Center sends all RSO information to signatories and members in CalLink. This includes registration info, Calapalooza & Cal Day sign ups, funding opportunities, workshops and more.
Page Reference: 
How to Navigate CalLink
CalLink | Access & Manage Your RSO Funds
Visit our CalLink FAQs
Links to an external site.


How to Navigate CalLink
CalLink | Access & Manage Your RSO Funds
ASUC Sponsorship | If you've received funding from on campus funding sources like the ASUC, the Graduate Assembly, campus departments, or campus grants, your funds will be deposited into your org's CalLink finance account. In order to utilize the CalLink finance tools, your org will need to be ASUC sponsored. The ASUC student government has fiduciary responsibility for RSO funds in CalLink. Like university recognition, ASUC sponsorship must be renewed annually.
CalLink Finance Agent Training bCourse | After confirming your ASUC sponsorship, you will also need to identify who will manage and approve your organization's financial purchase requests in CalLink. This role is called a financial agent and is separate from signatory status. To get financial agent status, you must complete the CalLink Finance Agent Training bCourse. Once approved, you will see the "ASUC/GA Agent User, Stage 2" status on your org's CalLink membership roster. We recommend having a minimum of two financial agents in your organization. The SU Finance team manages financial agent status. They created the FY22/23 CalLink Finance Training
 (Links to an external site.)
 to provide you with all the information you need to complete the CalLink Finance Agent Training bCourse. 
CalLink Finance Tool & Purchase Requests | You'll use CalLink to manage the funds you've acquired through the ASUC/Graduate Assembly, campus department(s), campus grants, and donations. The most common use of CalLink's Finance feature is the "Create New Request" button (highlighted below) to create a Purchase Request (PR). You'll click here when your organization needs to submit a purchase request to pay for your contracted performers, vendors, campus departments, and reimbursements. You can also use this feature to check out a credit card, pay an invoice, an honorarium, stipend, purchase order and more. The FY22/23 CalLink Finance Training
Links to an external site.
 shows you how.
Additionally, you can see your remaining balance and account information. This information is helpful when submitting your purchase requests to the ASUC Student Union Business and Finance office. They manage the Accounts Payable / Accounts Receivable (AP/AR) office window adjacent to the LEAD Center front door on the third floor of Eshleman Hall.
⚠️: This orientation will give you signatory status which is different from being an authorized ASUC/GA financial agent. If you need to access your RSO funds in CalLink, please be sure to complete the CalLink Finance Agent Training bCourse.


Policies Signatories Need to Know
As a signatory, it is important to know the key university policies. We don't expect you to memorize all the policies below. The LEAD Center advises you to familiarize yourself with each policy and identify which policy might pertain to your organization. Please feel free to use this section as a reference list when you need it. 
Key University Policies
University Trademark Policy
For further understanding on the following policies, please feel free to contact your LEAD Center advisor at lead@berkeley.edu. 
Key University Policies
Berkeley Campus Regulations: An overarching set of regulations which govern aspects of campus organizations and non-affiliates, use of University facilities, and time, place, and manner of public expression. These regulations address the rights and responsibilities of guests/non-affiliates and members of the University community, including faculty, staff and students, and provide standards for sustaining this community. 
Major Event Policy: Policy governing “Major Events” which is an event that has one or more of the following and is subject to review 6 weeks in advance of start date:
Important! ⚠️
You must submit the following documents (6) weeks prior to your event:
MEP event registration form
Links to an external site.


UCPD Event Notification & Security Assessment Form
Reservation request for your selected venue 
300 or more people are expected to attend;
The event is a dance as defined by this policy or a concert featuring amplified sound, at which a majority of the audience is not seated;
Alcohol is intended to be served, unless the event is a memorial service reception attended by fewer than 300 people or is an event at the Lawrence Hall of Science, the Botanical Garden, Blake House, or Anthony Hall; 
Outdoor amplified sound is requested;
Authorized campus officials determine the event is likely to significantly affect campus safety and security or significantly affect campus services other than those provided by the administrative unit making the event facility available;
Authorized campus officials determine the event has a substantial likelihood of interfering with campus functions or activities other than the functions and activities of the administrative unit making the event facility available.
Time, Place, and Manner on Campus: Like every university, Berkeley has its own carefully defined “time, place and manner rules” and other regulations governing individuals’ conduct on campus. These rules and regulations are designed to prevent substantial disruption of the University’s educational and other critical activities, protect lawful access to University programs and facilities, avoid unsafe behavior, and prevent the destruction of property.
The Code of Student Conduct: A set of established rules of conduct intended to foster behaviors that are consistent with a civil and educational setting. 
Nondiscrimination Policies: The University of California, in accordance with applicable Federal and State Law, does not discriminate on the basis of race, color, national origin, religion, sex (including sexual harassment), gender identity, pregnancy/childbirth and medical conditions related thereto, disability, age, medical condition (cancer-related), ancestry, marital status, citizenship, sexual orientation, or status as a Vietnam-era veteran or special disabled veteran. This nondiscrimination policy covers student admission, access, and treatment in University programs and activities
Links to an external site.
Policies on Sexual Harassment and Sexual Violence: The University of California is committed to maintaining a community dedicated to the advancement, application and transmission of knowledge and creative endeavors through academic excellence, where all people who participate in University programs, activities and services can work and learn together in an atmosphere free of harassment, exploitation, or intimidation. Sexual violence, sexual harassment, retaliation, and other behavior prohibited by these campus policies interfere with those goals. This set of policies address university responsibility and procedures in addressing sexual harassment and sexual violence. 
Statement on Hazing (Matt's Law): Matt's Law is a California law that allows for felony prosecutions when serious injuries or deaths result from hazing rites and also applies to our student organizations on campus. This bill increases the severity of charges for some hazing rituals, from misdemeanors to felonies, and for the first time gives prosecutors the ability to seek hazing charges against non-students. 
Policy on Alcohol and Tobacco on Campus: Particular brands or manufacturers of alcoholic beverages and tobacco products may not be advertised or promoted either (a) on the Berkeley campus or (b) in conjunction with activities or events away from the campus that are sponsored by campus units or campus-recognized groups and attended by students.
Use of Classrooms: When using classroom space, you must abide by the Classroom Use Policies or you may be denied from making future reservations.
Campus Online Activities Policy: The Berkeley Campus Online Activities Policy establishes policy and offers guidelines where existing policies do not specifically address issues particular to the use of electronic resources. It also clarifies the applicability of law and of other University or Campus policies to online activities. 


University Trademark Policy
We encourage you to familiarize yourself with UC Berkeley's Business Contracts and Brand Protection website. Here you will find the policies that list the do's and dont's of using the UC Berkeley brand. 
Swag and Custom Products
The LEAD Center advises you to use a licensed company if your student organization hopes to create custom items like pens and t-shirts. A licensed company has met the University’s standards
Links to an external site.
 to produce custom products. The University’s standards include fair labor practices, ethical sourcing, and meeting employment standards.
You can find a list of available licensed companies under the heading Use of UC Berkeley Trademarks & Licensees for Student Group Use.
Your RSO's Name
Under the Berkeley Campus Regulations, registered student organizations are not allowed to use University trademarks in the name of the student organization and in the nicknames of the student organization. The University has granted permission to registered student organizations to use the word "Berkeley" or the word "California" as part of a student organization in the following format: "Student Organization at/of Berkeley" or "Student Organization at/of California". 
Berkeley, Cal, California, Bear, Bears, Oski, the names of Campus Buildings, and other University trademarks, logos, etc. cannot be incorporated into a student organization’s name. RSOs who were grandfathered-in prior to the 2009 policy change can continue to use the University trademark (i.e. CalSlam and Cal Dragon Boat).
Brand Protection and Licensing and the LEAD Center manage the University’s name in order to protect the University’s brand of education, quality, and excellence.
Any use of University name, trademarks, logos, images, and/or brands requires the explicit permission and authorization of the University through both the LEAD Center and the Licensing Program at UC Berkeley (for products like t-shirts) or the LEAD Center and Berkeley’s Business Contracts and Brand Protection Office for all other uses. Trademark requests are not guaranteed to be approved. 
When branding your organization, we encourage you to use your original artwork, design a logo, select unique colors, and create a slogan.  If you have any further questions, please contact your LEAD Center advisor. 
Risk Management
Risk exists at different levels for anything your student organization may do. Risk can appear in a variety of programs from a cooking demonstration to an outreach event working with youth. We encourage student organizations to proactively prepare for risk in order to protect your participants, members, and your organization. 
This section will review different risk considerations, policies, and insurance for your organization's event(s).
Insurance for Your Events
How to Obtain a Certificate of Insurance
Events with Minors
Hazardous Materials & Equipment


Insurance for Your Events 
The LEAD Center advises student organizations to get insurance so that you can protect yourself and your organization from financial and legal consequences. We recommend that you ensure that your organizations's events are covered by insurance and you do your due diligence to mitigate potential risks and accidents such as bodily injury, harm to others, and damage to your property and campus property.
At UC Berkeley, UC Office of the President (UCOP) pays for (most) student organization events on campus already. This is a benefit to you! To qualify for the RSO Insurance program, you must be fully registered with the university via the LEAD Center.
Organizations holding low-risk events are automatically covered.
Organizations holding high-risk events need to obtain additional coverage.
Use the UC Hazard Chart
Links to an external site.
 to reference risk and coverage categories for certain event types.
 
Low-Risk Events
High-Risk Events
Meetings
Lectures
Receptions 
Seminars 
Teleconferences
Minors under the age of 18
Animals
Sports or other athletic activities
Performances of any kind
Moving vehicles
Tools, weapons, or heavy equipment
Fire (including cooking)
High attendance in an outdoor venue

 
To recap, low-risk events on campus are free to you as a student organization. Insurance for a high-risk event on campus may come out-of-pocket from the student organization. UCOP does not cover off-campus events, but the venue may still ask for coverage.
Apply for insurance coverage for your event at CampusConnexions / MERCER
Links to an external site.
How to Obtain a Certificate of Insurance (COI)
Be a Registered Student Organization with the LEAD Center and the University.
Visit Campus Connexion / MERCER Insurance
Links to an external site.
 to apply for insurance.
Expect a MINIMUM of 7-10 days lead time for each application/event/program.
Certificate will be generated and sent to you electronically, if approved.
If you have any other questions about risks related to your event, please feel free to contact your LEAD Center advisor. 


Events with Minors
⚠️: Any event(s) with minors (children and students under the age of 18) requires you to meet with your LEAD Center advisor. 
PC: UC Berkeley photo by Brittany Hosea-Small
If your organization is hosting an event with minors, LEAD Center advisors will work with you to ensure that your organization is taking the necessary steps to protect your organization and participants under the age of 18. 
We love hosting youth on campus just as much as you do. Yet, we must do all that we can to mitigate unintended impacts. We emphasize this because working with minors comes with a unique set of liabilities that are considered high risk. 
Note: Space reservations for events with minors will not be accepted without LEAD Center advisor approval. 
We will work with you to make sure you’re protected and informed about all possible liabilities so that you and your participants can have a safe, meaningful, and successful event! 
Resource: Volunteer Code of Conduct
Waivers 
Waivers are written agreements that state that the sponsor of an activity will not be liable for harmed suffered by participants. Waivers serve both as a legal and educational tool by calling on people to think about the potential risks of an activity. 
Waivers should be used whenever you are sponsoring an event which involve the following: 
Participants engage in performances, competitions, or other physical activities that could lead to injury (i.e. races, basketball tournaments, bounce houses, etc.)
Participants use equipment like sound systems, movie projectors or tools
Guests are take away from their home location
Participants are minors (anyone under the age of 18)
Click here for a copy of the RSO Waiver Form of Liability, Assumption of Risk and Indemnity Agreement. 
For further information, please feel free to visit Risk Services at UC Berkeley
Links to an external site.
. Be sure to check out their FAQ and Risk Worksheet if you're planning a high risk event.
If you have any other questions about insurance or waivers, please feel free to contact your LEAD Center advisor. 
 
Hazardous Materials & Equipment


Does your organization engage in any experimentation or work with hazardous materials or equipment, including but not limited to acids, aerosol, batteries, biological agents, compressed gases, chemicals, darkroom chemicals, lasers, fertilizers, mercury, radioactive materials, toxins, weed killer, etc.?
Does your organization use any Physical Hazards/Equipment: shop power tools (drills, saws, presses, cutters, laser cutters etc.), power supplies, fabricated electronics (items not commercially purchased but made), 3D printers, soldering, welding, brazing, etc.?
If your student organization works with any hazardous materials or equipment, we ask you to do the following:
Notify the LEAD Center (lead@berkeley.edu) before starting any experiments, builds or practice sessions.
Acquire insurance coverage for all RSO events, including "practice or experimental" sessions.
Do not assume that working in a campus lab or maker space grants you permission for this RSO activity
Get permission from campus spaces and faculty by disclosing your RSO activities and insurance requirements. RSOs have different requirements than an individual student working in a lab setting.
Consult with The Office of Risk Services and The Office of Environment, Health & Safety before working with Hazardous Materials & Equipment.
Event & Space Reservation
Location, location, location! We understand that space is a necessity for the livelihood of student organizations. We all need space to host our meetings, events, and celebrations. 
One of the privileges of RSO university recognition is the ability to host events and reserve venue spaces on campus. There are many venues on campus that are managed by individual departments. This page will review two of the most common ways RSOs reserve space on campus. Many campus venues have changed their reservation process since the pandemic. Please make note when reserving.
Berkeley Event Services
General Assignment (GA) Classrooms
Things to Remember
FAQs


Berkeley Event Services             
Website: eventservices.berkeley.edu
Email: eventservices@berkeley.edu 
Phone: 510-642-1141
Hours: Monday-Friday from 9:00am-5:00pm [hours may vary, please see our website or front desk for most up-to-date hours]
Location: Concierge Desk, MLK Student Union, 2nd Floor
Event Spaces Managed:
Outdoor Venues: Savio Steps, Sproul Plaza, Memorial Glade, Campanile Esplanade, etc.
Indoor Venues: Pauley Ballroom, Anna Head Alumnae Hall, Eshleman Hall Meeting rooms, Practice & performance spaces, etc.
How to Reserve Event Space: 
Before you begin, please note that only the signatories of your organization can submit a request or reserve a quick book space through Berkeley Event Services. One of your signatories must be the primary contact for your reservation request to Event Services.
You will submit your request online at eventservices.berkeley.edu
Click Event Request, Student Event Request, OR Quick Book Rooms.
Quick Book Rooms (EMS Portal): If you are a first-time user you will need to “Request An Account”.
Here, you can check for room availability, and reserve space. 
New users requesting an account will be checked by the reservations team to ensure they are current signatories before activating their account within the EMS Portal. 
Once an account has been activated by the reservations team, the user will be able to reserve quick book spaces on their own, up to 24 hours in advance.
Before your space reservation is confirmed, you will need to create a purchase order on your CalLink page (as discussed in the previous page). The Event Services team will send you and your LEAD Center advisor an invoice. Please make sure to work with your LEAD Center advisor to ensure timely payments. 
*Booking for Fall Semester will be live starting July 1st


Reservation Guidelines 
Student organizations must abide by the Student Union Event Services Policies. 
Limits on free Conference/Meeting Room Spaces in Eshleman and MLK and Practice & performance spaces:
Eshleman Practice and Performance Spaces
(1) reservation per day
(3) hours maximum per reservation
(10) reservations per semester
Eshleman Conference Rooms and bNorth Conference Rooms
(2) reservation per day
(90) minutes maximum per reservation
(10) reservations per semester
*Note that there are rental charges for most spaces (indoor and outdoor) managed by Student Union Event Services. Please see our current venue pricing plan here
Links to an external site.
.*
Event Planning Resources
The Student Union's Event Services team provides a number of event planning guides. Event Services provide additional services such as helping arrange other campus venues, catering, decorations, additional rental equipment and A/V equipment. Many of these services are offered complementary to student organizations.  


General Assignment (GA) Classrooms
Classroom Reservations Inquiry Form
Links to an external site.

Hours: Monday-Friday from 9:00 AM-5:00 PM
Location: 124 Sproul Hall (no in-person walkup availability)
Website for RSO Classroom Reservations
Website for Large/Special Weekend Reservations
General Assignment Classroom scheduling is managed by the Office of the Registrar utilizing the 25Live Reservation software. SPRING ‘23 SEMESTER RESERVATIONS ARE OPEN. Note: Separate reservation requests must be made for dates in Month 1 and for dates in Months 2-4 as two distinct time periods, with no overlapping occurrences between the two. Please refer to the Classroom Scheduling website for detailed instructions. 

Here is overview of schedule for Months 1 and Months 2-4


Access to 25Live
In order to reserve classrooms, you'll need to adhere to the following protocols: 
You must be an active signatory to reserve general assignment classrooms on campus.
Once you are an active signatory, you must request access to the classroom reservation software, 25Live
Links to an external site.
, by completing the Signatory Request for Access to 25Live Room Request System
Links to an external site.
 document. You must complete this step before submitting a classroom reservation request on 25Live. 
Should you have any difficulties troubleshooting 25Live access, submit a ticket here
Links to an external site.
.
25Live Instructions
Once you've acquired access to 25Live, you can begin your request by clicking "Event Form" or "Create an Event" as noted in the screenshot below:
Once you've completed your request, see "Your Upcoming Events" in 25Live to reference a successfully created request(s) which can be found by clicking the "Create an Event" box. 
25Live Reminders
Please note that classroom space is limited and available on a first-come, first-served basis determined by the submission date and time of the request.
As a reminder, when using classrooms, you must abide by the Classroom Use Policies or you may be denied from making future reservations. Please make sure you leave the room as you found it- clean and orderly. 
The LEAD Center recommends that the signatory in charge of classroom reservations remains the primary point of contact for General Assignments (GA) Classrooms for the academic year. 
If your request is denied, you must submit a new request and start over. The LEAD Center recommends that you supply alternate dates, times, and locations when making a request to avoid denials. 
Visit the 25 Live Instructions
Links to an external site.
 document on how to make a successful request.
Semester Limits on Reservation (20 Hours)
Each semester, student organizations are allowed to reserve a maximum of (20) weekday hours per semester in General Assignment (GA) Classrooms.
Example 1:
Weekly one-hour meetings for (15) semester weeks adds up to 15 of the 20 allotted hours.
Example 2:
A meeting that takes place over (1) hour in three classrooms is calculated as 3 hours of the allotted 20 hours. 
Alternative locations, such as the ASUC Student Union and campus libraries should also be considered if more time is needed.
Scheduling Timeline: Month 1 (ie. Phase I) & Month 2-4 (ie. Phase II)
The scheduling timeline changes each semester. You will be updated regularly on the Classroom Reservations website.
We strongly encourage you to visit this area for the most up-to-date information.In general, reservations are accepted (8) weeks prior to the start of the semester's instruction and request processing begins (6) weeks prior.
Scheduling is divided in (2) phases to allow the academic schedule to solidify in the early weeks of the term:
Phase
Reservation Limits
Month 1
(aka Phase I)
There will be limited reservations for the first (4) weeks of the semester:
Available dates/times:
Monday-Friday from 8:00 PM* to 10:00 PM
Month 2-4
(aka Phase II)
Reservations open Week (5) and beyond:
Available dates/times:
Monday-Friday from 8:00 AM* to 10:00 PM
Saturday-Sunday from 8:00 AM-10:00 PM

Note: Weekend hours do not count toward your 20-hour time limit. (1) four-reservations allowed per day on Saturday and Sunday. 
Request and Cancellation Deadlines
All classroom requests must be made at least (3) business days before your event. 
Similarly, all cancellations must be made at least (3) business days in advance. Timely cancellations allow unused space to be reassigned to other student organizations. 
Failure to cancel by the (3) business days deadline will result in the hours counting toward your 20-hour semester time limit.
 


Things to Remember!
Here's a quick summary of each venue's respective policies for common student organization actions:
RSO Action
Classroom Spaces
Student Union Spaces
Provide food and drinks
Not allowed
All event spaces require use of an approved caterer through Event Services; work with your coordinator to place orders.
Permit or Vendor Insurance may be required
Additional custodial fees may apply
Play amplified sound
Not allowed
Allowed based on Location & Time; Permit may be required
Reconfigure the room
Must be returned to original configuration with the correct number of seats according to the room diagram in each classroom by the door
You must specify the set-up required when you book the room; group should not configure the room themselves
Leave the space messy / damaged
Group will be charged and signatories held responsible
Group will be charged and signatories held responsible

 
Frequently Asked Questions 
Space on campus is managed by a variety of different departments in addition to the ones we reviewed above. For our must up-to-date list of venue information, visit our LEAD FAQ page. This page includes information on:
Outdoor and classroom space reservations 
Cal Performances, Zellerbach, Hearst Greek Theater, Multicultural Community Center, International House and the Alumni House.
ASUC managed spaces such as the Hearst cages and Eshleman 3rd floor RSO space
As a reminder, only certified signatories may reserve campus space on behalf of a student organization.
Funding Your Student Organization
Your organization's funds are important for covering your organization's annual costs. Although these costs range depending on your activities, the LEAD Center most commonly sees funding go towards event venues/spaces, supplies, performance artists, keynote speakers, transportation, and program materials. 
It is important to understand how to obtain grants and funding from a variety of campus resources as each funding source has its own set of policies and procedures. We encourage you to familiarize yourself with each financial process to ensure a smooth flow of funding into your org's CalLink account. 
There are many ways to get funding. This section will review the different funds available:
Funds Overview
ASUC Funds
Graduate Assembly Funds
ASUC/GA Financial Agent Certification
Fundraising
Campus Grants


Funds Overview 
Funds can be generated in numerous ways:
Applying for funds through the ASUC or the Graduate Assembly
Asking for membership dues
Applying for university grants
Finding sponsors, partners, or donors
Fundraising and crowdfunding 
Your organization must be recognized by the LEAD Center in order to be eligible for university, ASUC, or GA funding. Additionally, an organization must be sponsored by the ASUC in order to utilize the CalLink finance tools. If you seek to claim a non-profit status for fundraising, your organization must follow LEAD Center and ASUC policies and procedures, including being ASUC sponsored.
For further information, please feel free to contact your LEAD Center advisor. Please visit our FAQs page on our website to see the most up-to-date info on common questions!


ASUC Funds
The Associated Students of the University of California (ASUC) is responsible for allocating the fund collected as part of ASUC student fee. That fee is $33.50/semester for undergraduate students and $27.50 for Graduate and Professional students. All funds from undergraduate students go to the ASUC to allocate, and all funds from graduate and professional students go to the Graduate Assembly, a subsidiary of the ASUC. Both groups allocated funds to LEAD Center registered and ASUC sponsored student organizations.
Student groups must be registered with the LEAD Center and have current ASUC sponsorship  in order to be eligible to apply for ASUC funds. To review how to get your organization sponsored by the ASUC, please refer back to the RSO Basics section of this training.
After your Registered Student Organization is approved for sponsorship by the ASUC, your organization can apply for funding and space during the ASUC's Annual Budget and Space Allocation (ABSA) process. ABSA occurs during the Spring Semester when registered and sponsored RSOs can apply for funding and space for the following academic year. ABSA 20231-20242 funds have already been allocated so that process is complete and will not occur again until Spring of 20243. However, if your group missed ABSA allocations from Spring of 20232, your group can still apply for both Sponsorship and funding through the ASUC Senate Sponsorship Application and the ASUC Senate Contingency Fund Application which is only available from late August through Week 15 of Spring semester under CalLink ‘forms’.
ASUC funds are allocated to RSOs who apply through ABSA during the Spring semester. Registered Student Organizations must reapply for ASUC sponsorship every year through a CalLink form or by completing the ABSA application the previous Spring. Below is an estimated timeline but actual dates are set and publicized by the ASUC on CalLink and the ASUC ABSA Webpage.
Month
Action
FEBRUARY
Sponsorship, funding and Space applications are available on Callink and notification will be sent out by the ASUC
EARLY MARCH
Applications are due
MID-APRIL
Initial awards are determined and sent to groups
LATE-APRIL
If your organization is not happy with your allocation, you have the ability to appeal the initial allocation
MAY
Funding amounts are finalized and then the Senate passes the official budget for funds for the next academic year
AUGUST
Allocated funds become available to use pending current Registration with the LEAD Center

Senate Contingency Fund Process
Some ASUC funding is still available throughout the academic year if your organization was unable to request funding during ABSA or was not allocated a budget. The ASUC Senate Contingency Fund is allocated by application for Registered and Sponsored RSOs. This fund is for RSOs who feel need more funding than originally anticipated, who missed the ABSA deadlines, or for newly formed RSOs who missed the ABSA process the previous Spring. RSO's can apply for funding via the Senate Contingency Fund application process on Callink starting when classes begin in August and ending in the final week of classes in Spring.
Your RSO must be ASUC sponsored to apply for Senate Contingency Funds. ASUC Sponsorship applications are also open on Callink starting when classes begin in August and ending in the final week of classes in Spring. 
General Process/Timeline:
If your student organization is not yet ASUC Sponsored, fill out the appropriate ASUC Sponsorship Application on the ASUC Senate Callink
Links to an external site.
 page.
Fill out the appropriate form on the ASUC Senate CalLink page.
⚠️: submissions are only accepted during the Fall and Spring semesters. 
Your RSOs request, for Sponsorship or Funding, will be reviewed by the ASUC Finance Committee (FiComm) who will determine if sponsorship or funding will be recommended to be approved. Those recommendations are ultimately approved by the ASUC Senate every week.
Approved Sponsorship status is active immediately after Senate approval
Approved Contingency funds are deposited into your CalLink accounts after Senate approval.
This process takes approximately (2-3) weeks to complete. Please contact your LEAD Center advisor if after two weeks you do not see the allocated funds in your CalLink account(s).
Graduate Assembly Funds


Graduate Assembly funding comes from the graduate and professional student portion of the ASUC fee.
The Graduate Assembly Funding Committee and Funding OfficerChair allocate funds to Registered Student Organizations that are made up primarily of graduate students. Groups are eligible to apply for funding in the following categories:
GRSO Funding: GRSO Funding provides financial support for meetings, events, and the general operations of a GRSO. These funds can be spent on items such as food, beverages, serving supplies, and/or other meeting supplies.
Travel/ Professional Development Awards: Student funding through the Professional Development Award is meant to improve the lives of students in all programs and stages from first years to students in their final stages at Berkeley. Professional development needs and available resources vary between academic programs and the needs of all graduate and professional students may vary significantly. The GSP Travel Award provides funding for graduate student parents or legal guardians who, out of necessity, must bring their child(ren)/minor dependent and/or a caregiver for their child(ren) to conferences outside of the San Francisco Bay Area. 
Main Funding Round Process/Deadlines
All funding applications are located on CalLink on the GA Funding page
GRSO and Professional Development/Travel Award funding rounds happen monthly. 
All funds must be used by June 30, 20243. Funds not used by the deadline are returned to the GA to be reallocated.
All funding applications are reviewed by the GA Funding Committee. The Funding Committee makes recommendations to the GA Delegates.
All funding decisions are ultimately approved by the GA Delegates at their monthly meetings.
⚠️: Please note that all student organizations, including Graduate Registered Student Organizations, are eligible to apply for ASUC sponsorship.
For applications, deadlines, and complete details, please visit the Graduate Assembly website
Access to CalLink Finances | ASUC Financial Agent Certification
In order to access your org's finances in CalLink you must become a financial agent. Financial agents have the authority to approve CalLink purchase requests on behalf of their organization. We recommend you have at least two financial agents to approve your org's CalLink purchase requests.
The SU Finance team created the FY22/23 CalLink Finance Training
Links to an external site.
 to provide you with all the information you need to complete the CalLink Finance Agent Training bCourse. This training is designed for students who intend to become CalLink Finance Agents for their student organization(s). This training must be completed each academic year. Agent status granted in previous academic years is removed every summer from CalLink profiles. While this training is designed for students intending to gain Financial agent status, all organization members may access and review the bCourse. 
 
Fundraising
If you are conducting a fundraiser on campus, you must be certified to collect donations. You become certified by completing the Fundraising Certification Quiz (link forthcoming). If you are collecting cash donations or entrance fees, please be sure to familiarize yourself with our Cash Handling Guidelines.
If a donor is requesting proof of nonprofit status or a Tax ID number in exchange for their donation, please fill out the Request for Use of the ASUC Non-Profit Tax ID Number form in CalLink.
Crowdfunding at Berkeley is another great option to raise money for your organization. Students are able to set up month-long campaigns to raise money through the online portal.
RSOs who wish to do larger fundraising campaigns and want to be able to accept online payments can sign up for an account with Give to Berkeley and/or also participate in the BIG GIVE, Berkeley’s one-day online fundraising campaign. This is your student group’s chance to solicit donations from members, friends, family, and more. To do this, you must make an appointment and discuss it with your LEAD Center Advisor.


Campus Grants
Below is a summary of campus grants available to you. See this Funding Guide
Links to an external site.
 for a more detailed overview of all campus funding sources for student groups.
ASUC Grants and Scholarships: Student groups who wish to put on programs or events that will benefit the larger Cal community may apply for these funds and some are individual awards, all run by the ASUC Chief Grants Officer. Funding categories may change annually; in the past, categories have included the following:
Academic Opportunity Fund
Arts and Creativity Fund
Intellectual Community Fund
Greek Opportunity Fund
Multicultural Fund
Public Service Fund
Student Commuter Grant
Student Opportunity Travel Grant
Underserved Student Equity Fund
Textbook Scholarship
Outstanding Student Recognition Scholarship
Removing Impediments to Students' Education (RISE) Scholarship 
Berkeley Wellness Fund: The Wellness Fund supports wellness services and programming for students, as well as renovations, furnishings, and alterations to existing spaces required to support these new wellness programs.
The Big C Fund (Campus Climate, Community Engagement, and Transformation): Provides funding for student-initiated diversity, multicultural and equity projects and programs for graduate and undergraduate students and communities.
Big Ideas Grant: Big Ideas is an annual contest aimed at providing funding, support, and encouragement to interdisciplinary teams of students who have “big ideas”. By encouraging novel proposals and then supporting concrete next steps, Big Ideas is helping contest winners make an impact all over the world.
Chancellor’s Advisory Committee on Student Services and Fees (CACSSF) Discretionary Fund: Offers funds for campus units that provide co-curricular student services and student groups (via ASUC and Graduate Assembly Executive Officers) that impact the student experience.
Chancellor’s Community Partnership Fund: Provides funding for innovative community-campus partnerships designed to improve the quality of life for Berkeley residents. Berkeley-based collaborative projects that focus on arts and culture, community safety, economic development, environmental stewardship and education are encouraged to apply. Proposed projects must include at least one university and one Berkeley community partner.
Ethnic Studies’ 5th Account: Funds are available for student-initiated group projects, activities or events that meet the criteria of Ethnic Studies departmental sponsorship, significant impact on students, and cultural education.
The Green Initiative Fund (TGIF): TGIF offers grants for sustainability projects on UC Berkeley’s campus.
Student Opportunity Fund (SOF): Student Opportunity Funds provides support to student organizations for on-campus events and activities (co-curricular requests) and to individual students for educational opportunities like attending a conference or a workshop (educational requests).
UC Berkeley Public Service Center Student Initiated Community Projects: This sponsorship provides groups with leadership training, advising, and a grant to finance their service activities.
Back to Module 2


Module 3
Module 3
Ethical Responsibilities 
Your ethical responsibilities as a signatory are some of the most important obligations as a student leader.
The following module will guide you through content and resources that will help you create a supportive and caring environment for your organization's members. 
Wellness
Inclusion
Ways to Take Action
Quiz
Journal
Wellness
We, as a campus community, are committed to the wellness of our students. UC Berkeley's holistic approach to wellness addresses the physical, emotional, social, intellectual, occupational, spiritual, and financial health of our community.
The experience of leading an organization involves contributing to the wellness of the student experience by providing a co-curricular space where students can gain support and resources for their well-being. 
The following will cover strategies and resources available to you at Cal:
University Health Services— Tang Center
Supporting a Member’s Wellness Related to Substance Use
Mental Health
Signs of Distressed Members


University Health Services—Tang Center
Website: uhs.berkeley.edu
Phone: 510-642-2000
Hours: Monday-Friday from 10:00am-4:00pm; Closed on weekends
Location: 2222 Bancroft Way, Berkeley, CA, 94720-4300
Instagram: @bewellcal
Links to an external site.

Twitter: @TangCenterCal
Links to an external site.
University Health Services is the central hub for student health at UC Berkeley. They provide a variety of services ranging from acute care, radiology, a pharmacy, an optometry clinic, and counseling services.
UHS-Tang Center offers: 
Mental Health self-help information and resources 
Short-term counseling appointments (individual, couples, career, academic stress, psychiatry or specialized needs)
Longer-term off-campus referral coordination with community providers
Drop-in urgent or casual “Let’s Talk” counseling options
Workshops and groups
Health coaching
TAO: Therapy Assistance Online, online library of engaging, interactive programs that help you learn life skills and bounce back from disappointments and stumbling blocks
Look for the Signs of depression for yourself and your community
Text HOME to 741741 for free 24/7 crisis support
Tang 24/7 Counseling Line
(855) 817-5667
Mobile Crisis Team 
(510) 981-5900 or (510) 981-5254 from 11:30am-10:00pm
Urgent Drop-In Counseling at the Tang Center
10 am- 5pm Weekdays (No appointment necessary)
In a case of an emergency where these resources are insufficient call 911.
We encourage you to save these numbers in your phone so you have them when needed. 


Supporting a Member’s Wellness Related to Substance Use
Most of us make smart choices about whether to use substances and avoid negative academic, physical, or social consequences. We also recognize that not everyone drinks or chooses to experiment with substances. With that said, we all play a role in creating a Party Safe culture at Cal. Here, we provide some resources to help you get informed and know what to do to support a member’s wellness related to substance abuse.
PartySafe@Cal is a peer education prevention program through University Health Services—Tang Center. Please take a moment to watch, Party Safe and Here's How I Do It.
While leading your student organization, if you face choices and situations related to alcohol and other drug use (your own, your members, your events) use the information and resources here to help you navigate and be well.  University Health Services Social Services offers confidential and non-judgmental counseling and consultation about your own substance use or that of a friend or family member.
You can explore relevant harm reduction resources and actions for change on the Party Safe at Cal and Collegiate Recovery Program websites and by following them on instagram and facebook. Student leaders and members can email partysafe@berkeley.edu with non-emergency questions and concerns about substance use and culture.
Click the following resources for more information on intervention strategies: 
Alcohol and Other Drugs - Info
PartySafe Toolkit
Emergency: Signs of Overdose and Steps to Take
Collegiate Recovery Program
PartySafe Graphics & Video Library
Links to an external site.


Campus Alcohol and Drug Policies
The most important thing to remember is don’t let small problems become big problems! Ask for help if you need it!


Mental Health 
Wellness includes taking care of your mental health and being mindful of the mental health of your members. Remember, delegation and modeling self-care is also a part of being a leader and can help reduce stress. Additionally, delegation can provide opportunities to share the leadership experience so that more students can have an opportunity to try new things.
Mental Health Resources: 
COVID-19 Mental Health Resources this page discusses self-care tips as it relates to stress and emotional health. 
Just in Case
Links to an external site.
 is a Smartphone Mobile Site/App for students
Counseling & Psychological Services offers emergency, in-person, and group counseling
Be Well to Do Well is a Tang Center effort to encourage students to take care of themselves in all aspects of their lives. Its offerings include individual counseling, workshops, massage chairs, pet hug events, and more
Online Mental Health Screening
Links to an external site.
 is an anonymous self-assessment if you are concerned about yourself or someone you care for.
Feeling Stressed or Depressed this link takes you to an information page that discusses how to access self-help resources. 
Helping a Distressed Friend this link takes you a resource page on how to support a distressed peer. 
Look for the Signs this link takes you to a webpage that lists out resources for further support in addressing a distressed member of your organization. 


Signs of Distressed Members:


Stress is normal and, some stress, can even be useful. Periodically have members check their stress to notice if it’s turning to distress. Share and normalize using resources and help. Delegate and model self-care as a leader to manage your own stress. 
Additionally, be aware of any of the following behaviors as it may be an indication that you need to take action. Know your members and their patterns. 
Nervousness 
Agitation
Increased irritability, undue aggressive or abrasive behavior
Excessive procrastination and poorly prepared work
Infrequent class attendance, little or no work completed
Depression, lack of energy
Marked change in personal hygiene
Withdrawal, fearfulness
If you need support in addressing distressed members in your organization, please feel free to reach out to your LEAD Center advisor. We will work with the Center for Support and Intervention to provide the support and resources to your organization and members. 


Tang Tip: 
Take charge of your wellness! Be an organization that values taking care of yourselves and each other so we do well at Berkeley while still enjoying balanced and fulfilled lives.
There are many Be Well resources here to support you! Check out the video below to learn more about the (10) core wellness areas of exercise, gratitude, health, eating, resilience, self-compassion, sleep, social connection, stress, and time management. 
For further information on any topic covered in this module, please feel free to contact your LEAD Center advisor or University Health Services. 
Inclusion
Inclusion is the act of caring for all the members of the student community and creating a space where everyone can feel like they belong. There are some aspects of inclusion which we might already know and probably many other aspects that have never occurred to us. This section will help you dig deeper into inclusion and what it means for you and your organization.
Land Acknowledgement and Reflections on Inclusion
University Resources
Anti-Racism Resources


Land Acknowledgement
The LEAD Center acknowledges that UC Berkeley sits on the territory of xučyun (Huichin), the ancestral and unceded land of the Chochenyo speaking Ohlone people, the successors of the sovereign Verona Band of Alameda County.
We recognize that every member of the Berkeley community has, and continues to benefit from, the use and occupation of this land, since the institution’s founding in 1868. Consistent with our values of community, inclusion, and diversity, we have a responsibility to acknowledge and make visible the university’s relationship to Native peoples. As members of the Berkeley community, it is vitally important that we not only recognize the history of the land on which we stand but also, we recognize that the Muwekma Ohlone people are alive and flourishing members of the Berkeley and broader Bay Area communities today.
This acknowledgment was co-created with the Muwekma Ohlone Tribe and Native American Student Development and is a living document. Learn more about the Muwekma Ohlone Tribe.  
 
Reflections on Inclusion
Our students have a wide array of intersectional identities and communities at UC Berkeley. When was the last time you and/or your organization actively had a conversation about inclusion in your organization? What practices does your student organization have in place to make sure that everyone is included? 
We encourage you to think of inclusion not as a destination nor a goal that your organization “arrives” at. Instead, it is a chance to view inclusion as a constant practice that changes with each new year and each new group of students. There is always room to grow and more to learn when it comes to topics of inclusion. 
The following video created by the Gender Equity Resource Center provides tips for making classroom environments inclusive for everyone. Although, you may not teach a class, the video provides strategies for creating an environment in your organization that's inclusive for all students at UC Berkeley. 
Creating LGBTQ+ Inclusive Classroom Climates
Inclusive practices require that we pause, reflect, and understand our social positionality within systems of oppression. As leaders, we trust that you will set the examples by interrogating the ways in which systems of oppressions such as, although not limited to, race, class, and gender shape your social world. By taking an inward look, we gain a better sense of how to take action against prejudices within our communities. 
We hope you take the time to sit and reflect with these following questions. We trust that you will bring these questions back to your organization and facilitate dialogue among your group members. 
Questions to Consider:
How does my organization reflect on the complexity of our members’ identities and experiences? How can we reflect more? 
How is my organization inclusive of all our members’ identities and prospective members’ identities?
How accessible is my organization to the campus community, both physically and financially?
How does being more inclusive benefit my organization and its mission? 
What is my organization already successfully doing to create a welcoming space for all? What have we not tried  that we can try this year?
What is my organization doing to have challenging conversations on inclusion?
Who can we ask for support to increase inclusion in our organization? 
In addition to basic demographics and protected classes of identity, what are the life experiences of current and prospective members who  make up our student org?
If you need support facilitating dialogues about inclusion, please do not hesitate to contact your LEAD Center advisor. 


University Resources
Division of Equity and Inclusion: The Division of Equity and Inclusion provides leadership, accountability, and inspiration to the UC Berkeley campus in integrating equity, inclusion, and diversity into all aspects of university life. 
Principles of Community: The principles of community for the University of California, Berkeley, are rooted in our mission of teaching, research and public service. They reflect our passion for critical inquiry, debate, discovery and innovation, and our deep commitment to contributing to a better world. Every member of the UC Berkeley community has a role in sustaining a safe, caring and humane environment in which these values can thrive.
Bears that CARE: The Center for Support and Intervention offers interactive workshops direct training on various topics such as hazing, mental health, consent, social identities and microaggressions, and more to students and staff on bystander intervention strategies via Bears that CARE. You can become part of the solution in making the Berkeley community safer and more inclusive for everyone. Bystander intervention is a great tool and has the power to transform our campus. Request a Bears that CARE workshop led by a peer educator today!
Gender Equity Resource Center: Offers educational workshops to the Cal campus community on topics related to gender, sexuality, sexual violence, relationship violence and healthy relationships. 
Multicultural Community Center: Offers dialogues, workshops, and events that are open to all off-campus community members, students, staff, and faculty. Workshops focus on cross-cultural dialogue and work that centers on anti-oppression, sustainability and wellness, as well as social justice values. 
Multicultural Education Program: Provides a variety of workshops and seminars sponsored by campus departments and student groups that address issues of diversity, inclusion and multiculturalism.
PATH to Care Center: As a resource for the entire UC Berkeley community, dedicated to preventing violence and supporting survivors, the PATH to Care Center peer consultants offer consultations with student groups as partners in this mission.


Anti-Racism Resources  
Greater Good magazine is published by the Greater Good Science Center (GGSC) at the University of California, Berkeley. Since 2001, the GGSC has been at the fore of a new scientific movement to explore the roots of happy and compassionate individuals, strong social bonds, and altruistic behavior—the science of a meaningful life.
Greater Good Science Center's mission is to elevate the human potential for compassion. But that does not mean we deny or dismiss the human potential for violence, particularly toward marginalized or dehumanized groups.
For centuries, African Americans and other communities of color have been subject to this physical and structural violence, denied their humanity and often their basic right to exist. That’s why we are gathering Greater Good pieces that explore our potential to reduce bias and contribute to racial justice. The science we cover reveals the considerable psychological and structural challenges we are up against. But it also gives hope that another world is possible. 
Anti-racism Resources
Links to an external site.


How to Stop the Racist in You: The new science of bias suggests that we all carry prejudices within ourselves—and we all have the tools to keep them in check.
How to Beat Stereotypes by Seeing People as Individuals: We often judge people by their group membership—but research suggests other ways to see each other.
Why Telling Our Own Story Is So Powerful for Black Americans: Andrea Collier reflects on the role of storytelling in black American history—and in her own life.
Eight Ways to Stand Up to Hate: Hate crimes and hateful language are on the rise. What are you going to do about it?
Five Ways to Have Better Conversations Across Difference: It’s not easy, but we can find common ground in difficult conversations.
Official George Floyd Memorial Fund
Links to an external site.
: Fund established to assist the children and other family members of George Floyd as they seek justice.
Official Justice for Breonna Taylor Memorial Fund
Links to an external site.
: Fund established to support the friends and family members of Breonna Taylor as they seek justice for her murder.
 
Learn More About Hate Crimes
What is a hate crime?
What do I do if I become a target of, or witness, a hate crime or hate-motivated act?
Will the University take action?
On Campus Resources for Education, Advocacy, and Support
Additional Reporting, Support, and Other Information
Report a Hate Crime or Hate-Motivated Act
Links to an external site.


Ways to Take Action 
Have you ever been in a situation when you saw something that was wrong, but did not know how to respond? Taking action is one of the most important parts of your ethical responsibilities as a signatory. The situations you encounter will each require a different course of action. In this section, we will provide you with a toolkit for how to take action.
Intent vs. Impact Model
CARE Model
Submit a Report
Additional Resources


Intent vs. Impact Model
One place to start is by understanding Intent vs. Impact. While an individual may have good intentions, the impact of their actions may not always align with their intention. Especially in instances where potential harm may have occurred, it’s important to focus on the affected individual(s) experience of the harm (in other words, focusing on the impact).  
A common example of this model is that of a broken glass. Someone moves by a table and accidentally knocks over their friend’s glass and breaks it. Even though that person’s intention was not to break the glass, the impact is still that the glass is broken. It’s important for the person who broke the glass to take ownership of their impact on their friend. 
In an inclusion context, this model can be applied very broadly. For example, how might Intent vs. Impact be used to repair a relationship where an event requirement impacted someone negatively? Or, how might Intent vs. Impact be used to help a member understand how to take responsibility for a joke that had a harmful impact on another member? 
This is a process. We all make mistakes and can be wrong, but the most important thing is to listen, reflect, apologize, and work to do better in the future.
Scenario #1
Your organization is having a Fall retreat at an off-site location in the woods. One of your members, who uses a wheelchair, tells you that they didn’t notice any accessibility information in the flyer. They ask you if the retreat site will be accessible. They don’t want to make a big deal out of it and seem to emphasize that they don’t want to be a hassle. You don’t actually know the answer to this member’s question. What might you say and do?
Response: You might consider expressing your intent and also taking ownership of the impact. For example, you might say: “I’m sorry, I actually don’t know the answer to that right now. My intention is for everyone to be able to participate, and I recognize that not having that information for you could have a negative impact on how you feel. I will work on this right away to get you the answer.” Then, figure out how you can take action to rectify the situation. 
Learning Outcome: To create an inclusive environment, you and your organization can make sure that the retreat is accessible to everyone that wants to attend. If you’re unsure, you can always ask a LEAD Center advisor for help. Ultimately, you might consider the concept of universal design; the best standard is to proactively think of inclusion before any plans have already been set so that everyone can already fully participate from the beginning.


CARE Model
How can you support member’s safety? 


Bears that CARE is an active bystander initiative to make our campus safer. Bears that CARE helps us recognize and intervene in situations that have the potential to be violent or harmful.
Before we can discuss how to take action, let’s look at why people may feel like they cannot intervene, and how to overcome these barriers. Common reasons that prevent students from taking action include:
Bystander effect: “Someone else will handle it”
We tend to assume that, if there are many people present, someone else will step in. However, when everyone makes this assumption, often no one takes action. As a leader, it is important that you take responsibility and act.
Evaluation apprehension: “Maybe I’m misreading the situation”
Sometimes we worry that there is something about a situation that we do not understand, and we are making it a big deal when it may not be. However, it is better to do something about a harmless situation, than to do nothing about a harmful one.
Victim blaming: “They might have done something to deserve what’s happening”
No matter how someone is dressed, how much they are drinking, or who they are, no one deserves to be harmed. Everyone deserves to feel safe on campus.
Misperception of norms: “Other people seem to be okay with it, so I guess I shouldn’t say anything”
We tend to underestimate how many people are uncomfortable with a situation, because everyone has the same misperception. Chances are, if you think it is not okay, others agree, and would feel relieved and offer support if you take action.














Now let’s use the CARE Model in action! The CARE Model is not meant to be a step by step set of instructions but rather a menu list of options you have to safely intervene as an active bystander to help make the community a safer and welcoming space for all. There are many different ways to intervene to help take care of our fellow bears! 

Here are some examples of ways to use the CARE Model to help others:
Confront the Situation: Calling out a friend for a microaggression, “Hey, what you said was harmful because X”
Alert Others: Talking to the party host about a student who passed out, “I’m worried about this person who passed out, can you check on them to see if they are alright?”
Redirect Attention: Seeing an argument between a couple get heated and coming up with an excuse to separate them. “Hey! So and so is looking for you! Want to come with me and help find them together?”
Engage After: Checking in on a peer who was harassed. “Hey, what they said was not cool. I wanted to reach out and see how you are feeling, how can I support you?”

Let’s practice using the CARE model with the following scenario:   

 
CARE in Action 🐻
Your group check-in question asks everyone to share one of their weekend plans. Students go around the room sharing plans with friends or with romantic partners. One student, a man, hesitates at his turn and then says that he and his boyfriend are planning to go to Napa. You hear a groan from the front of the room and hear someone whisper, “I mean, I have gay friends, but I really wish he wouldn’t talk about his sex life. We're not THAT kind of club.” What would you do?
Confront the situation: “What do you mean, that kind of club? We welcome everyone here, and there was nothing inappropriate about what he shared.”
Alert others: “Taylor, as president, do you want to remind us about the norms of our group?”
Redirect attention: “I LOVE Napa… Did you try the Pinot Noir? It’s incredible.”
Engage after: “I’m sorry about what that person said. I want you to know that you are welcome here, and that person does not represent the way that the group feels. We will be addressing it with them individually, if that’s okay with you.”
What should you do if you see a potentially harmful situation? The CARE Model provides four easy options for how to intervene. Think of this as a toolkit, not a checklist - which option is best will depend on your personality, and the situation.
We encourage each member to be active bystanders. Take action to reduce the chance


Links to an external site.
 for your organization to learn more about the CARE model.


Submit a Report
Student Conduct Reporting
The Incident Report form is to report incidents that may be a violation of the Berkeley Campus Code of Student Conduct. If you choose to submit an Incident Report, it will be anonymous and not linked to you. It might not feel easy to decide what to do, so we encourage you to reach out for help if you need it. 
If you witness an ethical policy violation, you can always:
Tell a fellow signatory
Come to the LEAD Center and talk to an advisor
Submit an Incident Report to the Center for Student Conduct
CARE Report
If you are concerned about a fellow student’s well-being, you may refer a concern
Links to an external site.
 to the Center for Support and Intervention. A professional staff member will review the information and, if appropriate, work to support involved students and UC Berkeley community members. For a list of common signs of distress, please see the When To Refer Guide.
Please note that although information submitted in a Care Report is protected by educational privacy, it is not confidential in the same way that other campus offices can provide. If you want to speak to someone confidentially, consider contacting Counseling and Psychological Services at the Tang Center, the Ombuds Office for Students and Postdoctoral Appointees, and the PATH to Care Center depending on the concern.
Back to Module 3


Module 4
Module 4
Preventing and Responding to Sexual Violence and Sexual Harassment in Your Student Organization
Content Warning ⚠️
This training mentions the experiences of sexual violence, sexual harassment, intimate partner violence, and stalking, for folks who have been directly impacted or supporting those impacted. If you feel impacted during the training and wish to speak to a confidential resource, please call the 24/7 Care Line at (510) 643-2005.  

In this module, we will cover what you can do if sexual violence and sexual harassment (SVSH), relationship violence, stalking, and/or invasion of sexual privacy comes up in your organization and how you can prevent it. We recognize that this is a heavy topic and we want to provide the following content warning:
Take care of yourself as you move through this module - take a break if you need or want to. We recognize that reading about SVSH can be difficult, uncomfortable, and overwhelming.
Ultimately, we want to focus on PREVENTING SVSH from happening by proactively addressing this issue and how you can create a healthy culture in your student organization.
Statistics show that 1 in 3 women, 1 in 6 men, and 1 in 2 transgender folks experience SVSH. With that, we know there are survivors taking this course and survivors who participate in your student organization. We ask you to be mindful and thoughtful of your reactions to this content.
Confidential Advocates at PATH to Care Center are available for 24/7, confidential support if you need. Call the CARE Line at 510-643-2005.
Creating a Culture of Consent
Your Role in the Organization
Prevention Strategies
Supporting Survivors
Resources
Quiz
Journal
Creating a Culture of Consent
Sexual violence and sexual harassment (SVSH), includes sexual harassment, sexual assault, intimate partner violence, and stalking. SVSH are  fundamentally at odds with the university’s mission and principles of community. Preventing and responding to SVSH is a community responsibility. and UC Berkeley takes a collaborative approach to addressing SVSH. 


Two principal partners in this effort are the Office for the Prevention of Harassment and Discrimination (OPHD) and the PATH to Care Center. 


The Office for the Prevention of Harassment and Discrimination (OPHD) is the campus Title IX Office. OPHD and contributes to creating a culture of respect and consent by overseeing campus compliance with policies that prohibit discrimination and harassment for students, faculty, and staff, including those based on sex, gender, sexual orientation, race, disability, religion, and other protected categories. OPHD does this by receiving reports of harassment and discrimination, providing support to those harmed, and resolving matters either formally or informally. OPHD also partners also conducts educational workshops for the campus community, often in partnership with the PATH to Care Center and other offices.he Office for the Prevention of Harassment and


The PATH to Care Center is a confidential resource that works to transform our campus into a community that is free of sexual violence, sexual harassment, intimate partner violence, and stalking through prevention, advocacy, training, and healing. We The PATH to Care Center collaborates with the campus community to make social change with the goals of preventing, intervening in, and responding to harassment and violence, eliminating oppression, and creating the culture and environment we all aspire to and deserve. TheyWe envisions a campus community free of violence and grounded in social justice. This vision will be realized when every member of our community is a beacon of support and respect for those around them.
Please take a moment to watch, Creating a Culture of Consent and Respect at UC Berkeley, an informative video about the campus community's commitment to preventing and addressing Sexual Violence and Sexual Harassment. The video is brought to you by the PATHath to Care Center.


Module Learning Outcomes
Integrate violence prevention strategies:
We understand that each student organization has its own unique communities and environment. We would like you to think about tailored and "natural fit"opportunities to weave prevention into your student organization.
Promote healthy & respectful interactions among peers:
We all have the ability to change our campus culture to one that promotes prevention and respect. Throughout this module, we would like you to think about how you can be a part of this culture of respect as you learn more about consent and boundaries, positive social norms, and survivor support. 
Respond if a member discloses experiences of violence:
You might not occupy a leadership position – that is okay. Everything we review in this module are things you can personally do that will positively impact those around you, including the other folks in your student organization. If a disclosure occurs, we encourage you to warmly connect the survivor with start with the PATH to Care Center to explore confidential options and next steps. As a supporter, you are also encouraged to connect with the PATH to Care Center and the Office for the Prevention of Harassment and Discrimination  about reporting options, supportive and mitigating measures, and how your organization can respond to the impact of this disclosure and prevent future harm.
Identify next steps, personally and for your student organization:
We know you are seen as peer leaders, so people may come to you. It is important to have some basic information and skills so that you are prepared to respond effectively and compassionately.
Your Role in the Organization
In this section, we will make sure you understand your role as a signatory in your organization. First and foremost, your organization plays an important role in creating a culture of care and concern. As a community member, you have the obligation to support your peers. However, remember it is not just you—others in your organization can also respond and/or support. Since you are in this training and taking on the responsibility of being a signatory, you do have a role of making sure others in your organization also have this information. 
There are many long and short-term physical, psychological, academic, and economic impacts on survivors of SVSH. As such, student organizations can be important support places for survivors and be another touch point on campus where a survivor may turn when they need help. Your role as a signatory is to: 
Build a sense of community:
We encourage you to provide access to information and resources. It may be difficult to know how and where to get help. You have the influence to create space where survivors can get connected to supportive resources, as well as incorporate those resources into the culture of your organization. 
Offer peer-to-peer support:
Many survivors talk to peers before or instead of a staff member, confidential advocate, the police, etc. You may be the first person they share their experience with.
Only the survivor can decide whether they want to make a report to OPHD or law enforcement or both. Please do not make that decision for them, or try to investigate the incident yourself. You can help by offering to connect the survivor with resources. Keep in mind, you are not a “responsible employee”. Meaning, if a member discloses an incident of SVSH to you, you are not obligated to report to the campus Title IX Office or law enforcement, but we encourage you to reach you to reach out to the PATH to Care Center for support, resources, and options for both you and the survivor. 
Provide access to information/resources:
It can be is hard to know where to get help. You have the influence to create a space where survivors can readily get connected to the resources, as well as incorporate those resources as part of the culture of your organization.
For urgent support 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, please call the Care Line at 510-643-2005. If you receive a disclosure, you can offer to call the Care Line with the survivor. 
Request a prevention consultation or customized workshop from PATH to Care.
 Later in this module, we will provide you information on additional confidential resources such as the PATH to Care Center and the University Health Services.
Promote Prevention: 
Strengthen your leadership skills by learning more about preventing the SVSH and all forms of harm. The next module offers detailed information about workshops and other prevention resources available to you.
Request a prevention consultation or customized workshop from PATH to Care.


 Later in this module, we will provide you information on additional confidential resources such as the PATH to Care Center and the University Health Services.
Prevention Strategies
There are many opportunities to prevent violence before it happens, and many safe options to choose from to interrupt violence before it escalates. This section covers different prevention strategies you can start integrating today. You can also visit PATH to Care’s Prevention First webpage for additional resources and ideas, including workshops and consultations. 
Promoting a Culture of Consent and Respect for Boundaries
Bystander Intervention
Changing Social Norms
Scenario
Recapping Your Role as a Signatory


Promoting a Culture of Consent and Respect for Boundaries
Consent and boundaries matter in all contexts, not only sexual situations, from everyday moments such as asking before borrowing an item from a friend, to respecting the autonomy of your intimate partner to choose what to wear, who to talk to, and what to purchase. 
Create a group culture that respects boundaries by talking about them frequently and demonstrating respect for each others’ needs.
Consider the ways that your student organization interacts when alcohol is present. Do members get out of control, rude, or demonstrate disregard for boundaries when drinking? It is never okay to use alcohol to lower someone’s inhibitions or initiate sex with someone who is incapacitated, AND being intoxicated is never an excuse for violating boundaries. 
Think about how your group’s environment influences the culture of your organization, including how you talk to one another, how boundaries are observed and respected, factors like noise level that makes it harder or easier to engage in consent conversations, etc. You can incorporate violence prevention into your organization’s procedures, processes, and policies such as the bylaws of your constitution.
Resources & Opportunities
Send interested members to the T.R.A.I.L. Prevention and Response Certificate Training which is a 6-hour course that provides deeper knowledge about SVSH for individuals who want to become ambassadors for prevention in their community 
Request a workshop (Links to an external site from the PATH to Care Center)
Bring in education, such as the PartySafe@Cal toolkit, on the role that alcohol can play in sexual assault
Work with a consultant from the PATH to Care Center to identify improvements to organizational and community culture and incorporate violence prevention into your organization's policies or constitution.


Bystander Intervention
Research shows that intervening in a concerning or problematic situation is a very effective way to prevent SVSH. Stop the harm, in the moment, before it escalates.
The intervention can be direct or indirect. The key to bystander intervention is that you don’t have to be a superhero. You don’t have to solve everything about a situation, you just have to interrupt it enough to disrupt the behavior happening in the moment. 
Examples of direct intervention:
Role model ethical behavior by correcting your own imagery, jokes, and commentary that are sexist or demeaning
Tell the person that their behavior is not acceptable or desirable
Acknowledge to the person impacted and any bystanders that what happened isn’t ok
Examples of indirect intervention:
Redirect the situation such as reminding everyone the purpose of the meeting
Create a temporary distraction such as interrupting to ask about an unrelated topic
Check in with peers who are present to determine a strategy
Ask a peer who knows the people involved better to speak up
Get help from someone in a position of authority or power
Follow up later with the person who was impacted
Resources & Opportunities
Request a workshop from Bears That Care 
Use group agreements during meetings that encourages acknowledging impact and engaging in bystander intervention. 
Create ongoing opportunities for members to practice bystander intervention skills


Changing Social Norms
Even if your student organization is not specifically an advocacy, wellness, empowerment or support organization, you and your organization still have the power to set standards for how people behave. This in turn will not only positively impact your group but also encourage a culture of respect and violence prevention in the wider Cal community. 
Social norms are the unspoken rules about how we interact with each other. We learn these through observation and acculturation. For example, you probably learned to stand a few feet away when someone is getting money from an ATM through these methods. Social norms have a big effect on our sexual and relationship interactions, as well as cultural factors like gender roles, sexist bias, and victim-blaming.
How we perceive the norms of our community can influence our behaviors, even when we don’t agree with those messages. What kinds of messages do your members communicate informally about sexuality, relationships, gender, and power? 
There are many ways to communicate positive norms that can help counter unhealthy messages such as: 
Setting group agreements that encourage bystander intervention, practicing self care, making space for everyone to be able to equally participate, etc.
Intentionally creating a culturally competent space in your organization that respects cultural diversity and vales inclusion
Setting expectations for behaviors at social events in invites.
Visual messaging.
Programs and events can promote health norms through party themes, specifically events focused on this topic, or an SVSH-related volunteer opportunity. 
Resources & Opportunities
Apply for the annual Social Norms Seed Grant to get funding and support for creating your own customized social norms campaign
Work with a consultant from The PATH to Care Center to address the social norms in your student organization


Scenario
Now we will shift gears to put some of what you’ve learned today into practice with a scenario. Please reflect for a moment on how you would intervene in the following situation.
One of your members keeps posting sexist memes and jokes in your group chat. Some people laugh and brush it off as “that guy.” Others are uncomfortable saying anything.
How can you prevent harm from escalating or continuing? 
What types of changes might you consider making to the organization’s culture, practices, policies, and environment in order to discourage this and other unhealthy behavior?
In the above scenario, the member is engaging in harmful behavior that prevents a climate of respect and consent. Remember that the CARE Model suggests actions you could take including: confronting the situation directly, seeking help, redirecting, or intervening in other ways to create an accountable, safe organization. 
The important message we would like you to take away is that each member has the ability to change the culture so that this behavior is discouraged. The PATH to Care Center can consult with your student organization on culture change strategies and you can apply for a Social Norms Seed Grant to put together a positive social norms messaging campaign!


Recapping Your Role as a Signatory
Your role as a signatory is to do the following: 
Commit to being a trusted support, resource, and friend
Know your resources so you can provide information on healthy and safe relationships
Create a culture of consent and respect 
Safely intervene whenever you see something that’s potentially making someone feel unsafe or uncomfortable
Model active bystander behavior to encourage other members of your student organization to do the same
The LEAD Center can:
Provide prevention education, programming, and training.
Reinforce University’s commitment to prevention.
Make a report about UC SVSH policy violations as “responsible employees”.
The campus, as well as the UC System, are committed to addressing SVSH, dating/domestic violence, and stalking and keeping our campus safe for everyone. The LEAD Center wants to have honest conversations and hear your questions. Talk to a LEAD Center advisor anytime if you want further support. Please be advised, though, that LEAD Center staff are “responsible employees,'' which means that one of our roles is to report SVSH we observe or are told about. If you’re looking for confidential support please contact the PATH to Care Center at 510-643-2005 or refer to the Resources section in this module for a list of confidential advocates. 
Today’s session is just the beginning of a conversation. We are here if/when you have additional questions. We also have access to related campus and community organizations/resources and are happy to connect you with them. Thank you for your engagement throughout this module.
Supporting Survivors 
This section will review options you have if a survivor discloses an instance of SVSH to you.
What Do You Say?
Options for Action


What Do You Say?


If someone shares their experience of SVSH with you, start with the following: 
Listen: Just listening to someone goes a long way
Believe them: So does saying “I believe you”
Try not to ask questions that might place blame on the survivor, like why something happened or what they were wearing; there is no need to investigate or determine if an incident happened
Remember the decision to report, to tell someone, to seek counseling, etc. is that of the survivor’s 
Maintain confidentiality and ask for the victim’s consent if you feel the need to get help yourself
Offer resources if they want them, such as sharing the number to the 24/7 urgent support through the CARE Line (510-643-2005) 
Try the Following…
Because it might take you by surprise or bring up a lot of emotions for you, it’s common for people to respond with “What happened” or something else that is hurtful. If you say something like that, catch yourself, apologize, and come back to one of these other supportive statements. Here are some ways to respond that show support and can be meaningful for someone to hear after they disclose to you.
There is no perfect script! Try saying...
Thank you for sharing this with me
I’m sorry this happened to you
It’s not your fault
You are not alone
There is help available
Would you like to call PATH to Care’s CARE Line together?
If You Mess Up…
If you mess up, simply pause and reframe with one of these instead:
“Why do you say it was sexual assault? Hold on, sorry, that sounds like I don’t believe you. What I mean is that I do trust you and I’m here for you.”
Takeaway Point
Remember to breathe and that listening and telling someone you believe them can go a long way. Do not pressure them to do anything they are not ready for. Connecting with a confidential resource like the PATH to Care Center is always a good first step, either for you or for them. You and the person who disclosed to you may also decide to talk to LEAD Center advisors - just remember that LEAD Center advisors are responsible employees and are required to report anything that you disclose to them about sexual violence and sexual harassment to the Office for the of Prevention of Harassment & Discrimination and Harassment. That doesn’t mean LEAD Center advisors can’t help you, we simply want you to be aware. If you’re unsure about what help you need, going to a confidential resource first is usually a good idea.


Options for Action
We’ve seen orgs take action with good intent, but this canit has actually cause furtherd harm by continuing to disempower the survivor and violate their consent. We know accountability is important to you in your organizations, and we want to make sure you center survivors and allow the people who are trained to investigate and adjudicate to take those actions. 
In Prevention Strategies, we reviewed strategies you can take to prevent harm in the first place and how to address lower-level behavior before it reaches a policy violation as a strategy for accountability.
Here are some possible actions you can take in the moments after someone discloses an experience of sexual violence and/or sexual harassment to you:
In the First 24 Hours:
 Affirm the survivor, connect them to the PATH to Care Center (24/7 urgent support is available at 510-643-2005)
Seek support for yourself from the PATH to Care Center
Reach out to the LEAD Center and/or an advisor
Review your constitution and policies on SVSH to ensure you are following protocol
Protect the survivor’s confidentiality and privacy
Ask the survivor what they need  
In the Following Weeks:
Check in and respect the survivor’s requests are maintained by you and members of the student organization
 Maintain confidentiality 
Follow guidance and protocols for accountability
Continue your own self-care
Review your constitution and policies on SVSH. If updates need to be made, please consult LEAD Center advisors and PATH to Care Center staff.
Regardless of how much time has passed since the incident, the PATH to Care Center is a confidential resource available to support the survivor and any concerned supporters.
In your attempt to keep your organization members safe, accountable, and support survivors, please remember that it is not your role as a signatory or student organization leadership to investigate incidents of SVSH. This is the responsibility of trained professionals. PATH to Care Center staff and LEAD Center advisors are here to support you and your membership through SVSH related concerns.
Resources
This section will cover resources that you can use related to SVSH prevention and response.
A Safe Place to Start
Additional Campus Resources
Off-campus Resources
Reporting Options
Where to Get Support Guide


A Safe Place to Start


PATH to Care Center offers prevention, advocacy, training and healing to the UC Berkeley campus. 
Website: care.berkeley.edu 
Office Phone: 510-642-1988
Care Line (24/7): 510-643-2005
Facebook: facebook.com/PATHtoCARE
Links to an external site.

Instagram: @pathtocareucb  


PATH to Care offers: 
Free, affirming and confidential support for those impacted by sexual violence, dating/domestic violence, stalking, and sexual harassment
Help with exploring options and resources
Resources for ALL members of Cal community, including Alumni and visitors to campus
Prevention education workshops and trainings for your student organization, as well as consultations on how to best integrate prevention and response strategies into your org's practices and procedures 
Confidential advocates at the PATH to Care Center can help all students, faculty, and staff who are impacted directly or indirectly by sexual harassment, sexual violence, dating/domestic violence, stalking, invasion of sexual privacy, and retaliation. You can refer someone directly, or call to consult with an advocate to talk about how to support the person who disclosed to you.


Additional Campus Resources
The following resources are confidential resources - meaning they are not required to automatically report any information that is disclosed to them. These are great additional places to go if you or a member of your organization needs support.
University Health Services (UHS)/Tang Center, Social Services
Free individual and group counseling and consultation for students. 
Website: uhs.berkeley.edu/social-services
Phone: 510-642-6074
Satellite Office at University Village Phone: 510-520-7031
For after-hours emergency consultation or crisis resource referrals, call 855-817-5667
OMBUDS Office for Students and Postdoctoral Appointees
A confidential, neutral resource for navigating informal and formal options, with the goal of empowering students to make choices that best fit their needs. 
Website: sa.berkeley.edu/ombuds
Phone: 510-642-5754
Student Advocate’s Office (SAO)
Provides confidential, student-to-student casework services for undergraduate and graduate student survivors; helps survivors understand available resources and options. 
Website: advocate.berkeley.edu
Phone: 510-642-6912
Email: help@berkeleysao.org
 
Off-campus Resources
The following are off-campus confidential resources.
Family Violence Law Center (FVLC)
Support and legal assistance for survivors of domestic violence and sexual assault. 
Website: fvlc.org
Links to an external site.

24/7 Crisis Line: 800-947-8301
Bay Area Women Against Rape (BAWAR)
Counseling, hospital, police, and courtroom accompaniment for sexual violence survivors of all genders.
Website: bawar.org
Links to an external site.

24/7 Hotline (English & Español): 510-845-7273


Reporting Options
The following are options for individuals to officially report an act of SVSH. Individuals can choose one, both, or neither reporting option. Only the individual knows which option is right for them.
Office for the Prevention of Harassment & Discrimination (OPHD/Title IX Office)
The Office for the Prevention of Harassment and Discrimination (OPHD) is the campus Title IX Office and contributes to creating a culture of respect by overseeing campus compliance with policies that prohibit discrimination and harassment for students, faculty, and staff, including those based on sex, gender, sexual orientation, race, disability, religion, and other protected categories. OPHD does this by receiving reports, responding to, and resolving reports of harassment and discrimination .Ensures that the University provides an environment for faculty, staff, and students free from discrimination, harassment, and sexual violence; including reporting and investigations.
At any time after receiving a report, OPHD has the ability to propose and implement supportive measures, including interim and mitigating measures such as no-contact directives, academic supportive measures, emergency housing, interim suspension, or other measures suited to the situation. 
Website: https://ophd.berkeley.edu
Phone: 510-643-7985
Email: ask_ophd@berkeley.edu
Online reporting webform: https://uctitleix.i-sight.com/portal/Berkeley
UC Berkeley Police Department
Emergency: 911 
Emergency from campus: (510) 642-3333
Non-emergency: (510) 642-6760
Berkeley Police Department
Emergency: 911
Back to Module 4


Module 5
Module 5
You're almost done...
We commend you for taking on this important role for your organization.
In this training, we covered campus resources, university expectations of student organizations, administrative and ethical responsibilities, and information on how to address and prevent SVSH in your organization. In this last module, we review how to make your signatory status official.
Once you have signatory status, please remember to identify yourself as a signatory to your organization members at an upcoming meeting. Our expectation is that you share the main content of the training and begin to create a culture of care and consent by disseminating the prevention resources from this training.
Making Your Signatory Status Official!
Bonus Resources
Stay Updated
Module 5 Quiz
Journal
Making Your Signatory Status Official!
There are three components to attain signatory status. The first is to take this Signatory training to understand the Signatory role and university expectations as an authorized representative of your organization. The second is to let us know which org(s) you will be serving as a signatory for this year. The last is to accept the Signatory Terms & Conditions in CalLink. The T&Cs confirm your understanding of the Signatory role and serves as your official acceptance of the university policies, procedures, and processes that you and your org will abide by. You know you are a signatory when you see the "Signatory" position assigned to your name on your org's CalLink roster.
Final Steps
Complete the Module 5 Quiz and submit the Google Form to let us know the org(s) for which you will serve as a signatory this year. This officially completes the Signatory Training requirement.
Accept the Signatory Terms & Conditions in CalLink.
Once your bCourse completion is processed, you will receive an email confirming your signatory status. You will be prompted to accept the Signatory Terms & Conditions in CalLink.
You can also find the Terms & Conditions through CalLink memberships:
Click your circular profile on the upper right hand corner
Click Memberships
Scroll down and Select "Review" 
If you are adding an additional organization to your involvement record we ask you to resubmit the Quiz 5 in this Module. 
If you do not complete the Module 5 Quiz and accept the Terms & Conditions by the 2/10/23 deadline, your organization may be placed in FROZEN status until Fall 2023 if the RSO has not met the minimum of 4 active Signatories. 
If you have questions or need assistance, please email the Student Organization Advising Team at studentorgadvising@berkeley.edu .
 
For ASUC/GA Student Government Officials Only (Not RSO members)
All units of the ASUC and GA are not RSOs. As such, all ASUC and GA Officials and Officers need to complete the ASUC/ GA Officials Signatory Eligibility Quiz. The Signatory role is only eligible for ASUC and GA Officials, their Chiefs of Staff, Commissions, and Chartered Programs Leaders. You will not need to re-do the bCourse, but ensure you select the correct quiz. If you have an additional role in an RSO you may still complete the Signatory process for that organization but will need to complete the RSO Module 5 quiz. If you are an ASUC or GA Official and have questions, email studentgovadvising@berkeley.edu.
All other questions about RSOs or Signatories should be directed to the Student Organization Advising Team at studentorgadvising@berkeley.edu .


Frequently Asked Questions 
1. What happens once I complete the final steps listed above?
After completing this course in full, please give us 1-2 weeks to upload your training completion status into your CalLink Involvement record. You can also check that you've received signatory status by logging into CalLink and looking at your organization's roster if you're re-registering or by checking the Registration Progress Tracking document
Links to an external site.
.
If you are a new RSO, we will upload your Signatory Training bCourse completion status after your organization has been established in CalLink by the LEAD Center.
2. What if I am a member of multiple RSOs but I only want to be a signatory for a certain RSO?
You will list which RSOs you want to be a signatory for in Quiz 5.
3. What if a member of my RSO wants to be added as a signatory later in the semester?
That student can complete this Signatory Training bCourse and list the RSO in Quiz 5 later in the semester. 
Note: If you have any further questions, you can always contact the LEAD Center at (510) 642-5171 or studentorgadvising@berkeley.edu.

Bonus Resources
We covered a variety of resources in this orientation. You can always refer back to this bCourse throughout the rest of the 2022-2023 academic year. In this section, we review bonus resources that may not have been captured in any of the previous modules but may be helpful for you.
Career Center 
Website: career.berkeley.edu
Phone: (510) 642-1716
Hours: Monday-Friday from 9:00am-5:00pm
Location: 2440 Bancroft Way, Berkeley, CA 94720
Facebook: @CalCareerCenter
 (Links to an external site.)

Instagram: @calcareercenter 
The Career Center Peer Advisor team is excited to offer interactive professional development workshops for your campus organization! Additionally, Career Center Peer Advisors are looking to partner to table more on Sproul, meet student orgs, and drive more drop-ins at the Career Center.  Peer advisors can help with:
Resume & Cover Letter Writing
Interviewing 
LinkedIn
Handshake
Job + Internship Searching
Career Fair Preparation + Advice 
Career Center Resources Overview 

You can also take advantage of these other resources from the Career Center:
Request a workshop
Links to an external site.
Drop-In Hours:
Monday-Friday 12pm-4pm
No Appointment Needed
You can speak with a Peer Advisor at the Cal Career Center.

Publications and Media Center
Website: studentmedia.berkeley.edu
Email: studentmedia@berkeley.edu
Hours: Monday-Thursday from 12:00pm-9:00pm; Friday from 12:00pm-5:00pm
Location: MLK 177 (near the Open Computing Facility or OCF), check in MLK 155
Facebook: @BerkeleyStudentMedia
 (Links to an external site.)

Instagram: @ucpmc
Publication and Media Center (PMC) offers the following programs to publications and media RSOs:
Distribution: All publications will be distributed across campus in one of our 13+ locations!
Space Reservation: Check out our conference room and/or adjacent studio in MLK 155 or 177 for your meeting and recording needs!
Marketing/Events: Our bi-weekly newsletter, website, and social media outlets are all available to publicize events/releases!
Design Consulting: Let us help you create the perfect logo/flyer for your brand! 
Equipment Rental: Check out cameras, sound equipment, lights, and novel items like fog machines!
Stay Updated
Every month, we send out a newsletter with the most current information on: 
upcoming events 
deadlines 
other leadership highlights! 
You are automatically subscribed as signatories. Check your email and stay tuned for updates from the LEAD Center! 
Additionally, you can sign up for more frequent updates from the LEAD Center by following our our social media. Be sure to follow us on: 
Facebook: UC Berkeley - LEAD Center
Links to an external site.
Twitter: @TheLEADCenter
Links to an external site.
Instagram: @TheLEADCenter
Links to an external site.
Back to Module 5



For Module 3: Environment

Environment
Sustainability is a core Berkeley value. While our campus is one of the greenest universities, there is much work to be done on zero waste, clean energy, and environmental justice. As leaders of student organizations, it’s important to situate your organization in the city of Berkeley and its potential role and impact in the world.

The following gives an introduction to environmental justice, recommendations for eco-friendly practices, and resources to learn more:
Environmental Justice in Berkeley
Eco-Friendly RSO Operations


Role of RSOs
Registered Student Organizations (RSOs) have an important role in addressing environmental issues, since they can raise awareness, educate their members and the wider community, and advocate for policies and actions that promote more environmental awareness, reduce greenhouse gas emissions, and mitigate the impacts of climate change. 
Reasons for RSO Involvement
Students are the leaders of the future, and have the potential to enact lasting and widespread change.
Universities themselves have a responsibility to act, as they themselves are a major source of greenhouse gas emissions. By organizing clubs that address climate change, a university can show their commitment to sustainability. 
Additionally, clubs that are interested in social justice should also be concerned about climate change, as climate change disproportionately affects marginalized communities. This includes low-income communities, people of color, and indigenous communities.
RSOs have the ability to organize people around a common goal and make change. These organizations can amplify individual voices. 
RSOs is largest method of reaching a variety of students to promote environmental awareness throughout the campus 
Many events and activities are put on by RSOs, so it is important to provide training materials for RSOs to operationally implement better practices. 
Environmental Issues & Climate Change
The Berkeley community faces a number of environmental issues. Climate change is a critical issue that affects the entire planet and its inhabitants, with anthropogenic climate change caused by the burning of fossil fuels, which produces greenhouse gases. As students who utilize campus facilities, energy, and resources for events and activities, we can make conscious energy and resource conserving decisions to help reduce the impact of climate change on our community. A key environmental issue in Berkeley is the smoky air quality due to wildfires that have affected Berkeley residents the past several years. This is worsened by mismanagement of the environment and intensified by climate change. 

Campus Organizations to Support & Follow:
Clean Energy | Sustainability & Carbon Solutions
UC Green New Deal Coalition (@ucgreennewdeal and @ucberkeleygnd on Instagram)
Fires & Smoke | Office of Emergency Management has tips for preparing for various fire-related hazards.
Wildfire Smoke | Office of Environment, Health & Safety on resources and guidance on how to reduce exposure to wildfire smoke

Image source: Dark, orangey skies over campus: Let there be light, please? | Berkeley News

Environmental Justice in Berkeley
As an RSO leader, you will be in charge of planning multiple events from small scale gatherings to a couple hundred attendees in conferences. Some of these events will be located in the nearby area or directly on campus, but regardless, they require a vast dependency on the resources of the local bay area community. 

1/ GENTRIFICATION & DISPLACEMENT

How is this relevant to RSOs? 
Briefly, gentrification is the rising of land value to an unaffordable rate such that original residents are displaced in lieu of wealthier ones. In the name of economic prosperity and development, gentrification pushes people out of their own homes and concentrates wealthy and non-wealthy residents in different areas exacerbating disparities. There is a long history of gentrification with universities in general, but there are a few bottom lines to consider as an RSO leader. 

Venues & Gatherings:  venues in oakland are often used for large berkeley events. 
Vendors: Support small businesses and local entrepreneurs 
Get involved in larger campus movements led by students:
People’s Park is a topic of the present where we are blatantly faced with 
Like People Park, it's important to stay informed about our actions as students coming into the areas- and do something about them as well. 


2/ INDIGENOUS LAND 
Indigenous land has been stolen from the very beginning of development of the Americas. It is important as RSO’s, that we continue to engage in any way possible in the  countless movements fighting for rights and protection of indigenous people and land. Specific to the Bay, we are on Houchin Territory of the Ohlone People. Here are a few actionable and accessible ways all RSOs can support environmental justice and indigenous sovereignty in the Bay Area: 

Pay the Shumi Land Tax
Stay updated with the So’gorea Te Land Trust Movement 
Join/Learn about the SEED (Students Enacting Environmental Defense) Campaign

Eco-Conscious RSO Operations 
Administration: 
Include a Sustainability Officer Position on your club board 
Goal: Having a sustainability officer ensures there is a dedicated member to solve issues and create new ideas regarding the sustainability of your club’s events and activities 
The Student Environmental Resource Center can engage with your Sustainability Officer and will provide trainings and support for this position 

Food Service:
Food service includes food acquisition, production, and distribution that normally occurs at club  events, meetings, and fundraisers. In addition to large events, daily food sales on Sproul generate a huge amount of single-use plastic waste that would otherwise be avoided. Please use this chart to find alternatives for plastics, and consult the Student Environmental Resource Center in MLK for more guidance on how to avoid plastic. Request for the current Green Team Associate. 

Plastics harm our wildlife, ecosystem, and our community. Once used, plastics are diverted to landfills or the ocean where it continues to contaminate our waterways, forests, streets, and homes. Furthermore, once made, plastics take over 500 years to break down, and still exist as micro-plastics that are able to contaminate our lungs and bodies. Please help prevent the endless harm that plastics create by choosing alternative methods and materials for your club’s activities and events. 
Single-use plastic item:
Alternative:
Gloves
Sanitizing Wipes & Spray
No alternative → reduce as much as possible!
Reusable rags and reusable disinfectant spray (ie. Blueland)
Plastic Food Packaging


Purchase snacks in bulk instead of individually wrapped (e.g. at Berkeley Bowl)
Encourage your members to bring reusable containers
Try to buy more fruits & produce, there are plenty of plastic free options and it's healthy! 


Plastic Water and Beverage Bottles
Encourage your members to bring reusable water bottles and find nearby water refill stations (campus is full of them!)
Let members know ahead of time plastic water bottles will not be provided
Purchase beverages with recyclable packaging, such as aluminum cans or glass bottles 
Use paper cups and plates when reusable/metal/glass dishware is not possible 
Plastic Food Wrap (saran wrap)
Aluminum foil
Beeswax food wrapper
Paper pastry bags (compostable!)
Condiment packets
Provide larger condiment bottles to share rather than small, individual plastic packets
Plastic platters, jugs & cases 
Large reusable plates, use pyrex or glass containers, and use reusable glass jugs 
Thrift Stores like Out of The Closet sell quality dishwares for very affordable prices! (ex: $3 for a ceramic, large plate)  
Plastic utensils
Reusable utensils
Compostable* utensils if using reusable utensils is not feasible	
Plastic bags
Reusable bags, net bags, mesh bags → all are machine or hand washable 


*UC Berkeley’s composting facility is currently not able to process #7 PLA (compostable plastic) products, so they are typically sent to the landfill. We encourage the use of compostable plastics over regular single-use plastics, but reducing and reusing are much better for the planet!

Purchases : 
Clubs constantly engage in all retail spaces on campus, online, and externally. This page outlines a few  alternatives and practices so RSOs can be zero waste practitioners in their spaces. 
Furthermore, if waste is produced from your club activity or event, please include proper signage that communicates how to properly dispose of waste during events and after. 

	Event & Tabling Supplies / Promotional Items: 
		
Signage [name tags, posters, decor] 
Invest in a reusable fabric banner with your club’s name 
Use Chalkboard or another reusable board for specific signages like an event name or food sale sign
Use a sturdy paper like cardstock or cardboard and create name tags with yarn or safety pins. Current name tags are plastic lined stickers or plastic encased paper → these end up in the trash after attendees leave the event
Promotional Flyers 
Utilize digital platforms and barcodes as much as possible 
Limit printing flyers for essential purposes only 
Club Gear & Merchandise 
Sell and giveaway items that are practical, functional, and reusable 
Mugs,  Metal Utensil Kit, Fabric bags, 
Furthermore, prioritize club experiences over products 
Amazon Purchasing 
Limit buying from amazon, and instead try to find items locally 
This will prevent a lot of plastic transport packaging
Buy from places with greater supply chain transparency 
Fundraising 
When selling food, avoid plastic wherever possible
Consider alternatives to reselling individually packaged restaurant food 
Use glass or reusable platters, containers, drink dispensers and more 
Thrift stores sell good quality items for as low as $3 a piece 
Use paper products for single servings rather than plastic


Support & Guidance Directory : 
	The Student Environmental Resource Center at Cal is the hub for transformative and grassroots environmental initiatives. To find more information or request guidance in implementing environmental practices in your club, please contact SERC’s Zero Waste Research Center and request for the current Green Team Associate. Link : https://serc.berkeley.edu/zero-waste/

Image Sources: Canva Graphics 
